Q1. Explain the difference between fs.writeFile() and fs.writeFileSync(). In a server handling 100 users at once,   which one should you use and why?
Ans. In a server handling 100 users at once, fs.writeFile() should be used because it is asynchronous and non-blocking. It allows Node.js to handle multiple requests simultaneously without blocking the event loop, whereas fs.writeFileSync() blocks execution and degrades server performance.

Q2. When a user types localhost:8000/admin?user=xyz in the browser:
    ● What is the Pathname?
    ● What is the Query Parameter?
    ● Which Node.js built-in module is used to separate these two?
Ans. ● localhost:8000/admin
     ● user=xyz
     ● url module

Q4. Which method is the most appropriate for deleting a directory that might contain files, ensuring a 'recursive' deletion?
Ans. fs.rm(path, { recursive: true })

Q5. In Git, which command moves changes from the Working Directory to the Staging Area?
Ans. git add

Q6. Node.js is described as "Non-blocking" and "Asynchronous". Explain what this means using the example of reading a file while still being able to handle a web request.
Ans. Node.js is non-blocking and asynchronous, which means it does not wait for long operations like file reading to complete. While a file is being read in the background, Node.js can continue handling other web requests. Once the file read operation finishes, a callback is executed to send the response, allowing efficient handling of multiple users simultaneously.

Q7. Explain the Git workflow from creating a repository to pushing code to GitHub.
Ans. ● git init
     ● git clone <repo-url>
     ● git status
     ● git add file.js      # stage one file           
     ● git add .            # stage all changes
     ● git commit -m "Initial project setup"
     ● git remote add origin <repo-url>
     ● git push origin main

Q8. Explain in short Difference between fs.unlink() and fs.rm()
Ans. fs.unlink() deletes only files, whereas fs.rm() can delete both files and directories, including directories with files using the recursive option.

Q9. What is the purpose of res.writeHead()? Explain the significance of status codes 200, 401, and 404 in the context of a login system.
Ans. res.writeHead() is used to set the HTTP status code and response headers before sending the response. In a login system, status code 200 indicates a successful login, 401 indicates unauthorized access due to invalid credentials, and 404 indicates that the requested login page or route was not found.



